= Symbolize attribute values

This plugin introduces an easy way to use symbols for values of attributes.
Symbolized attributes return a ruby symbol (or nil) as their value
and can be set using :symbols or "strings".

== Install

=== Gem

    gem install symbolize


=== Mongoid

    gem "symbolize", :require => "symbolize/mongoid"


=== ActiveRecord

    gem "symbolize", :require => "symbolize/active_record"



== About

Just use "symbolize :attribute" in your model, and the specified
attribute will return symbol values and can be set using symbols
(setting string values works, which is important when using forms).

On schema DBs, the attribute should be a string (varchar) column.


== Usage

ActiveRecord:

    class User < ActiveRecord::Base

      symbolize :gender, :in => [:female, :male], :scopes => true

    end

Mongoid:

    class User

      include Mongoid::Document
      include Mongoid::Symbolize

      symbolize :gender, :in => [:female, :male], :scopes => true

    end

Other examples:

    symbolize :so, :in => {
        :linux   => "Linux",
        :mac     => "Mac OS X"
    }, :scopes => true

    # Allow blank
    symbolize :gui,  :in => [:gnome, :kde, :xfce], :allow_blank => true

    # Don`t i18n
    symbolize :browser, :in => [:firefox, :opera], :i18n => false, :methods => true

    # Scopes
    symbolize :angry, :in => [true, false], :scopes => true # AR
    symbolize :angry, :type => Boolean, :scopes => true # Mongoid

    # Don`t validate
    symbolize :lang, :in => [:ruby, :js, :c, :erlang], :validate => false

    # Default
    symbolize :kind, :in => [:admin, :manager, :user], :default => :user


=== in/within

The values allowed on the enum field, you can provide a hash like
{:value => "Human text"} or an array of keys to run i18n on.
Booleans are also supported. See below.

allow_(blank|nil): What you expect.


=== validate

Set to false to avoid the validation of the input.
Useful for a dropdown with an "other" option textfield.


=== method

If you provide the method option, some fancy boolean methods will be added:
In our User example, browser has this option, so you can do:

    @user.firefox?
    @user.opera?


=== Booleans

Its possible to use boolean fields also. Looks better in Mongoid.

  # ActiveRecord
  symbolize :switch, :in => [true, false]

  # Mongoid
  symbolize :switch, :type => Boolean

  ...
    switch:
      "true": On
      "false": Off
      "nil": Unknown


=== i18n

If you don`t provide a hash with values, it will try i18n:

    activerecord:
    or
    mongoid:
      symbolizes:
        user:
          gui:
            gnome: Gnome Desktop Enviroment
            kde: K Desktop Enviroment
            xfce: XFCE4
          gender:
            female: Girl
            male: Boy


You can skip i18n lookup with :i18n => false

    symbolize :style, :in => [:rock, :punk, :funk, :jazz], :i18n => false


=== scopes

If you provide the scopes option, some fancy named scopes will be added:
In our User example, gender has male/female options, so you can do:

    # AR
    User.male    # => User.all(:conditions => { :gender => :male })

    # Mongoid
    User.female  # => User.where({ :gender => :female })


You can chain named scopes as well:

    User.female.mac => User.all :conditions => { :gender => :female, :so => :mac }

For boolean colums you can use

    User.angry     => User.find(:all, :conditions => { :angry => true })
    User.not_angry => User.find(:all, :conditions => { :angry => false })

    ( or with_[attribute] and without_[attribute] )


=== default

As the name suggest, the symbol you choose as default will be set
in new objects automatically. Mongoid only for now.

    symbolize :mood, :in => [:happy, :sad, :euphoric], :default => (MarvinDay ? :sad : :happy)

    User.new.kind # It may print :happy


== Rails Form Example

You may call `Class.get_<attribute>_values` anywhere to get a nice array.
Works nice with dropdowns. Examples:

    class Coffee
      symbolize :genetic, :in => [:arabica, :robusta, :blend]
    end

    - form_for(@coffee) do |f|
      = f.label :genetic
      = f.select :genetic, Coffee.get_genetic_values

Somewhere on a view:

    = select_tag :kind, Coffee.get_genetic_values


== View Helpers (DEPRECATED)


  <% form_for @user do |f| %>
    <%= f.radio_sym "gender" %>
    <!-- Alphabetic order -->
    <%= f.select_sym "so" %>
    <!-- Fixed order -->
    <%= f.select_sym "office" %>
  <%end>


== Specs

Run the adapter independently:

    $ rspec spec/symbolize/mongoid_spec.rb
    $ rspec spec/symbolize/active_record_spec.rb


== Notes

This fork:
http://github.com/nofxx/symbolize


Forked from:
http://github.com/nuxlli/activerecord_symbolize


Initial work:
I've been using this for quite some time and made it a rails plugin now. More
background iinformation can be found at
http://zargony.com/2007/09/07/symbolize-attribute-values-in-activerecord


Copyright (c) 2007-2008 Andreas Neuhaus, released under the MIT license
